chapter 1 . mr . sherlock holmes



mr . sherlock holmes , who was usually very late in the mornings , save
upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night , was
seated at the breakfast table . i stood upon the hearth-rug and picked
up the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before . it
was a fine , thick piece of wood , bulbous-headed , of the sort which is
known as a " penang lawyer . "  just under the head was a broad silver
band nearly an inch across .  " to james mortimer , m . r . c . s . ,
from his friends of the c . c . h . , " was engraved upon it , with the
date " 1884 . "  it was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family
practitioner used to carry - dignified , solid , and reassuring .

 " well , watson , what do you make of it ? "

holmes was sitting with his back to me , and i had given him no sign of
my occupation .

 " how did you know what i was doing ? i believe you have eyes in the back
of your head . "

 " i have , at least , a well-polished , silver-plated coffee-pot in
front of me , " said he .  " but , tell me , watson , what do you make
of our visitor ' s stick ? since we have been so unfortunate as to miss
him and have no notion of his errand , this accidental souvenir becomes
of importance .  let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examination
of it . "

 " i think , " said i , following as far as i could the methods of my
companion , " that dr . mortimer is a successful , elderly medical man ,
well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of their
appreciation . "

 " good ! "  said holmes .  " excellent ! "

 " i think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country
practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot . "

 " why so ? "

 " because this stick , though originally a very handsome one has been
so knocked about that i can hardly imagine a town practitioner carrying
it .  the thick-iron ferrule is worn down , so it is evident that he has
done a great amount of walking with it . "

 " perfectly sound ! "  said holmes .

 " And then again , there is the ' friends of the C . C . H . ' i should
guess that to be the something hunt , the local hunt to whose members he
has possibly given some surgical assistance , and which has made him a
small presentation in return . "

 " really , watson , you excel yourself , "  said holmes , pushing back his
chair and lighting a cigarette .  " i am bound to say that in all the
accounts which you have been so good as to give of my own small
achievements you have habitually underrated your own abilities . it may
be that you are not yourself luminous , but you are a conductor of
light . some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of
stimulating it . i confess , my dear fellow , that i am very much in your
debt . "

He had never said as much before , and i must admit that his words gave
me keen pleasure , for i had often been piqued by his indifference to my
admiration and to the attempts which i had made to give publicity to
his methods . i was proud , too , to think that i had so far mastered his
system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval . he now took
the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his naked
eyes . then with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette ,
and carrying the cane to the window , he looked over it again with a
convex lens .

 " interesting , though elementary , " said he as he returned to his
favourite corner of the settee .  " there are certainly one or two
indications upon the stick . it gives us the basis for several
deductions . "

 " has anything escaped me ? "  i asked with some self-importance .  " i
trust that there is nothing of consequence which i have overlooked ? "

 " i am afraid , my dear watson , that most of your conclusions were
erroneous . When i said that you stimulated me i meant , to be frank ,
that in noting your fallacies i was occasionally guided towards the
truth .  not that you are entirely wrong in this instance . the man is
certainly a country practitioner . And he walks a good deal . "

 " then i was right . "

 " to that extent . "

 " but that was all . "

 " no , no , my dear watson , not all - by no means all . i would
suggest , for example , that a presentation to a doctor is more likely
to come from a hospital than from a hunt , and that when the initials '
C . C .  '  are placed before that hospital the words ' Charing Cross '
very naturally suggest themselves . "

 " You may be right . "

 " the probability lies in that direction . and if we take this as a
working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our
construction of this unknown visitor . "

 " well , then , supposing that ' c . c . h . '  does stand for '
charing cross hospital , ' what further inferences may we draw ? "

 " do none suggest themselves ? you know my methods . apply them ! "

 " i can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has practised
in town before going to the country . "

 " i think that we might venture a little farther than this . look at it
in this light . on what occasion would it be most probable that such a
presentation would be made ? when would his friends unite to give him a
pledge of their good will ? obviously at the moment when dr . mortimer
withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to start a practice
for himself . we know there has been a presentation . we believe there
has been a change from a town hospital to a country practice . is it ,
then , stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was
on the occasion of the change ? "

 " it certainly seems probable . "

 " now , you will observe that he could not have been on the staff of
the hospital , since only a man well-established in a London practice
could hold such a position , and such a one would not drift into the
country .  what was he , then ? if he was in the hospital and yet not on
the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician -
little more than a senior student . and he left five years ago - the
date is on the stick . So your grave , middle-aged family practitioner
vanishes into thin air , my dear watson , and there emerges a young
fellow under thirty , amiable , unambitious , absent-minded , and the
possessor of a favourite dog , which i should describe roughly as being
larger than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff . "

i laughed incredulously as sherlock holmes leaned back in his settee and
blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling .
